---
title: 什么是整洁的代码?
tags:
  - 翻译
  - 优雅
---

什么是整洁的代码?
--------------

在软件工程这样一个庞大而多样化的领域中，持续阅读对于构件基础知识和探索分支知识至关重要。与任何行业一样，软件开发有一些必读书籍，而《代码整洁之道》就是其中之一。这本书常年出现在Google的“顶级软件工程书籍”搜索结果中， 并且在工程界广为人知。

这里有一些我从中学习到的知识，与大家分享一下。

---

### 对这本书的介绍

在很多方面，《代码整洁之道》的结构像是一本代码手册。是一本非常自以为是的书，正如大多数好书一样。

马丁在这本书中描述了什么是好的编码以及怎样去重构不好的编码，以告诫那些无法分辨出编码习惯好坏的人。马丁对他的失败持开放态度。多年来阅读糟糕的代码的经历让他有意去帮助其他开发者避免危险。总之，这本书成百上千的建议会使你生产出优质的代码。也就是说，大多数工程师都在努力学习，使他的糟糕的代码变得更好。

But *Clean Code* is more than a tutorial. It describes not just how but why to write good code. More than rote memorization of rules (though many of the book’s rules stick with me), I read to understand a great programmer’s inviolable values. For me, it all boiled down to three key concepts.

但是《代码整洁之道》更像是一个教程。

#### **1\. Craftsmanship Matters**

Rarely does a coder have the freedom to sit with a piece of code until it’s perfect (also, “perfect code” is an illusion; everything has flaws). Still, writing the best possible code should be a software crafter’s top priority. At times, they may mean pushing back against deadlines, client demands, management demands, and fatigue. Business conditions often set boundaries on what’s “possible,” but a coder always has at least some control over the quality of what he or she writes.

Bottom line: Code that “works” is not always “done.” If a coder’s job is to produce a product that solves a problem, should it matter how it solves the problem? Yes. Software done well benefits everyone in the long run — clients, users, companies, and coders. Code that is messy, rushed, or “good enough” is code with an eye on short-term returns.

> Poorly crafted code frays at the edge much faster than you might expect.

Martin suggests that the key to writing stellar code is high-quality input (thoughtful, maintainable, flexible code) that results in high-quality output (long-term business payoffs).

#### **2\. Extra Effort Today Saves Pain Tomorrow**

All of us have experienced the disappointment that comes with using a low-quality product. Think of the new shirt that frays at the edges after just a few runs through the washing machine, or the plastic toy that breaks mere moments after your child takes it out of the box. Poorly crafted code is no different — it frays at the edges much faster than you might expect.

Compare this to something you treasure for its quality. I once wore a pair of shoes almost daily for over a decade before they finally wore out. They were a bit more expensive than other shoes but their quality was undeniable, and I saved money in the long run. What did I do when the time finally came to throw those shoes out? I bought an identical pair because I knew they’d last me another decade.

The same principle applies to code. High-quality input not only produces longer-lasting output, it also saves money and builds customer loyalty. Meticulously refactoring and testing your code may take longer in the beginning, but the savings in technical debt and maintainability are well worth the extra effort.

#### **3\. Your Code Is Not Your Own**

It’s important to take pride in your own work. It’s equally important to recognize that the code you write is not your own.

> Overly clever tricks, hacks, and sleights of programmatic hand are only fun for the author.

This may seem like a bit of a paradox — after all, writing clean code requires you to have a stake in its quality. But good code is not really yours because it’s intended for consumption by others: your teammates, your customers, and even your future self. What happens when some future project maintainer (possibly even yourself) can’t understand why you’ve written something the way you have? They will no doubt have to spend precious time and mental energy deciphering the puzzle you’ve left for them.

***

### 什么是整洁的代码？

Everyone has his or her own list of what makes for clean code — indeed, Martin’s bookbegins with a collection of definitions given by various software luminaries. My definitions, based on what I’ve learned in the book, are as follows:

1.  **Clean code is simple**. Perhaps not simple in algorithmic or system-level complexity, but certainly simple in implementation. Overly clever tricks, hacks, and sleights of programmatic hand are only fun for the author and diminish the code’s long-term value. The same goes for long-winded code that takes forever to get to the point.

2.  **Clean code is** **readable**. If the naming conventions, spacing, structure, and flow used in a program are not designed with the reader in mind, then that reader will almost certainly fail to understand the original author’s intent. Conventions about how to write readable code may seem dogmatic or lacking in expressiveness, but they help to make code communal rather than arcane.

3.  **Clean code is considerate**. Code that does not do its best to inform future readers is code that does not respect their time. Clean code should be written with the assumption that future consumers are intelligent, thoughtful professionals (like you), and it should go out of its way to help them.

4.  **Clean code is** **tested**. No one writes perfect, bug-free code on the first try. Even if it were possible to do so, there is no guarantee that perfect code won’t break later. Writing clean code means writing tested code. That way, future users can be confident they’re interacting with something that works. Moreover, when making changes, they will have a ready-made test suite to confirm that nothing broke.

5.  **Clean code is practiced**. Writing clean code requires good muscle memory, just like playing an instrument, kicking a ball, or frying an egg. The best way to learn to write clean code — and, more importantly, retain the skill — is to do it all the time. When you’re at home working on a personal project, do it with clean code — even when no one else will ever see it.
6.  **Clean code is relentlessly refactored**. Clean code should be in a constant state of refactoring. With a good test suite to back up your code, you can refactor it as much as you like and never worry about breakage.

7.  **Clean code is SOLID**. Good code is as much about good design as it is about cleanliness. Following the [SOLID principles](https://medium.com/@severinperez/writing-flexible-code-with-the-single-responsibility-principle-b71c4f3f883f) is one way to ensure that your code is flexible, maintainable, and long-lasting.

If we take Martin’s book as a bible, the attributes for what makes “clean code” could multiply exponentially. But this list, culled from careful reading of *Clean Code*, is a good place to start. Adhering to these principles requires constant attention to detail and a willingness to acknowledge that what you wrote yesterday can still be improved today — even if it worked just fine before.

* * *

Although *Clean Code* contains a plethora of useful rules and best practices, it’s perhaps more useful for the mentality it imbues in its readers — that craftsmanship matters, effort today saves pain tomorrow, and code is never really your own. The more coders read it, the cleaner the world’s code will be, and all of our jobs will be easier.


译者的话
--------
之前翻译的那几篇太多链接了，无法发到微信公众号等平台，太郁闷了。


参考
----

[What Is Clean Code?](https://medium.com/s/story/reflections-on-clean-code-8c9b683277ca)
